---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/political-science/concepts/system-analysis-and-theory/"}
---

Plano, Jack. C.; Riggs, Robert. E.; Robin, Helenan S. Robin. 1973. The Dictionary of Political Analysis. 2nd ed. California: ABC-Clio.

# System (155-156)

Any set of elements that exist in some patterned relationship with one another. A system may be composed of tangible elements, such as the parts of an internal combustion engine, or such intangible ones as a system of ideas. For many analytical purposes, the elements of a system may be specified by the investigator to meet his or her research needs. Thus, a group of people might be specified as the set of elements making up a political or other social system; or, as is commonly the case, the elements might be specified as political interactions rather than human beings. Either could constitute a system, as long as the elements are identifiable and the relationships among them specifiable. The way in which the investigator defines the elements of the system and the relevant relationships among them will determine the boundaries of the system (the analytical line that separates the system from its environment). An open system is one whose functioning is affected by inputs from its environment; a closed system is unaffected by its environment or, for analytical purposes, is considered as being unaffected. See also SYSTEMS ANALYSIS, p. 156.

Significance

"System," as an analytical concept, is widely used in the physical and biological as well as the social sciences, which facilitates interdisciplinary borrowing. In political science it is now well entrenched as part of the vernacular and has become the basis of a systems approach to political analysis. Its conceptual breadth makes it useful in dealing with informal as well as formal governmental structures and with the wide variety of political institutions and processes found in different cultures throughout the world. It also has the advantage of suggesting a clear analytical distinction between political phenomena and their environment, while calling attention to the interrelatedness of the various parts of the political process and the interaction between the system and its environment.

Further reading: 
[Mental Model Musings (systems-thinking.org)](https://www.systems-thinking.org/index.htm)



# Systems Analysis (156-157)

An approach, sometimes called systems theory, that treats politics as a set of interactions occurring within, but analytically distinct from, the larger social environment. Systems analysis provides a number of conceptual categories for describing and analyzing political behavior. Some of the more salient concepts are system, subsystem, environment, boundary, input, output, conversion process, and feedback. System implies patterned interactions or persisting relationships among political entities. A system that constitutes an element of a larger system is called a subsystem. The setting within which a system occurs is its environment. The analytical line that separates the system from its environment is the system boundary. A system receives inputs from its environment in the form of demands upon the system and supports for its functioning. Through the operation of the system, inputs are subjected to a conversion process, which leads to system outputs embodying rules to be enforced or policies to be implemented. When system outputs affect the environment so as to modify inputs, feedback occurs. Systems that tend, when disturbed, to return to an equilibrium state are said to be homeostatic. General systems theory is concerned with the development of systems concepts and research methodologies having applicability to many scientific disciplines and pointing ultimately toward a synthesis of human knowledge within a systems framework. In an organizational management context, systems analysis refers to the use of a systems framework to evaluate strategies, alternatives, and program objectives with the object of optimizing resource utilization in the achievement of organizational goals.

See also COMMUNICATIONS THEORY, p. 23; CYBERNETICS, p. 34; ENVIRONMENT, p. 46; FEEDBACK, p. 54; HOMEOSTASIS, p. 65; INPUT, p. 69; OUTPUT, p, 85; PARADIGM, p. 86; POLITICAL SYSTEM, p. 108; SOCIAL SYSTEM, p. 144; STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONALISM, p. 152; SYSTEM, p. 155; THEORY, p. 159.

Significance

The influence of systems analysis is now so pervasive that most political science research makes use of systems concepts, at least implicitly, even when some other approach— such as decision making or institutional analysis—is being utilized. In a stricter sense, however, systems analysis is directed

specifically to such questions as the relationships of systems to their environment, the persistence of systems over time, system stability, system functions and related structures (the concern of structural-functional analysis), communication within systems (the province of communications theory), the identification, classification, and measurement of system inputs and outputs, and the nature of the conversion process. Systems analysis is now one of the key paradigms in political science. Systems analysis, in the organizational management sense, has been of great practical significance since its adoption in 1961 by the United States Department of Defense as part of the planning-programming-budgeting-systems (PPBS) approach to budgeting. It has since, however, been discarded by the United States government.

# Social System (Plano et.al 1973: 144-145)

An aggregation of two or more persons that interact with one another in some patterned way. Social system, in its generic sense, may refer to the interaction of human beings on any scale—within a small group, a complex organization, or an entire society. Some analysts identify individual human beings, or groups, as the basic elements of social systems (that is, systems of human entities). Others speak of actions, interactions, behavior, or relationships as the system elements (that is, systems of action), Both points of view assume the existence of people and their interaction. All but the simplest social systems embrace

a number of subsystems, These may be conceived as subgroups of different people (families as subsystems of a larger society, governmental agencies as subsystems of the larger governmental system). Or they may involve the same people or overlapping groups of people, differentiated as separate subsystems by the kinds of interactions in which the people engage, such as economic and political subsystems of a larger national social system. A social system, consisting of interacting people, may be distinguished from a cultural system, which refers to learned modes of behavior characteristic of a society, and from a personality system, which refers to the organized dispositions within a single individual that lead to characteristic responses.

See also CULTURE, p. 34; INTERACTION, p. 70; PERSONALITY, p. 90; POLITICAL ACTION, p. 95; POLITICAL SYSTEM, p. 108; SOCIETY, p. 145; STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONALISM, p. 152; SYSTEM, p. 155.

Significance

The concept of a social system is one of the links through which theories, perspectives, and insights of sociology have been transferred to the study of politics. The political system may be studied as one kind of social system, for whatever insights the approach may afford. The political system may also be considered in its relationship to other social subsystems and to the larger society. Talcott Parsons's classic formulation of the four functional requisites of a social system—pattern maintenance, adaptation to the physical and human environment, integration of system interactions, and attainment of system goals—provides one comprehensive framework for examining the functions of the political system within society.

# Theory (Plano, et al. 1973: 159-161)

An idea or body of thought that purports to explain, predict, or prescribe in any field of inquiry. In empirical science (including empirical political science) theory refers to a logically related set of propositions stating relationships between variables for the purpose of explanation or prediction or both. A single theoretical proposition or generalization is sometimes called a theory, but the term usually implies the linking together of a number of related propositions in some coherent structure, such as a theory of power elites, or a theory of political integration. One commonly used classification distinguishes lower-level, middle-range, and general theories.

A lower-level theory consists of one or a few theoretical propositions dealing with a particular subclass of events. A middle-range theory embraces a larger class of events, combining and interrelating a number of separate propositions. General theory, broadest in scope, combines middle-range theories into a comprehensive structure for integrating knowledge in a large segment of a field or even a whole discipline. Thus, a hypothesis about the relationships between bloc alignment and voting behavior in international organizations might be joined with other lower-level propositions to form a middle-range theory of voting behavior in international organizations, This in turn could be combined with related middle-range theories to form a general theory of international organizations. Empirical theory which deals with observable relationships, may be distinguished from philosophical theory, which is concerned with value judgments (normative theory and with the discernment of reality by a priori reasoning. Empirical theories and hypotheses may be deduced from existing bodies of theory or from abstract models, or they may be arrived at inductively by generalizing from the observation of particular cases. However derived, empirical theories are tested by reference to the factual situations they purport to explain or predict. A well-established theoretical proposition is called a law. An axiom is a proposition whose truth is taken to be self-evident, or established. Axioms sometimes appear as a set of interrelated propositions, proven or assumed, that constitute the fundamental postulates of a theory. Propositions deduced from the axioms of a theory are called theorems. The truth of etheorems may be demonstrated deductively by reference to the axioms, or it may be subjected to empirical testing.

See also COLLECTIVE GOODS, p. 22; COMMUNICATIONS THEORY, p. 23; CONCEPT, p. 24; DECISION-MAKING APPROACH, p. 35; ELITIST THEORY, p. 42; ENGINEERING THEORY, p. 44; FACT, p. 52; FIELD THEORY, p. 55; FUNCTIONALISM, p. 57; GAME THEORY, p. 58; GENERALIZATION, p. 59; GROUP THEORY, p. 61; HYPOTHESIS, p. 65; ORGANIZATION THEORY, p. 84; POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY, p. 103; POLITICAL THEORY, p. 109; PREDICTION, p. 113; PROPOSITION, p. 118; SCIENCE, p. 137; SCIENTIFIC METHOD, p. 138; STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONALISM, p. 152; SYSTEMS ANALYSIS, p. 156; TENDENCY STATEMENT, p. 158; VARIABLE, p. 166.

Significance

The concerns of political science extend to both empirical and normative theory. Since World War Il, however, the emphasis of the discipline has been heavily empirical—not only in emphasizing factual relations above value concerns, but also in seeking empirical generalizations to explain relationships. Given the vagaries of human behavior, empirical political theories must ordinarily be expressed in terms of probabilities or tendencies, rather than invariant laws. The cumulative efforts of political scientists have thus far produced many theories of lower and middle range, but no convincing general theories. Systems and decision-making concepts represent two approaches to general theory in political science, but each approach lacks the well-articulated, deductively related body of propositions that would constitute a general theory. Even middle-range theories, while often having some utility for description, explanation, and prediction, fall far short of the ideal of a coherent, verified set of propositions. Some empirical political scientists have been criticized for "barefoot empiricism, "hyperfactualism," or using an "atheoretic" approach (that is, the gathering of facts without an adequate theoretical framework and subjecting the data to various analytical routines in the hope that meaningful, if unpredicted, relationships will be found.)